Predicting Car Accident Severity Based on Weather Conditions by Lucas Win

As part of my degree studies in Data Science course. I have researched and analyzed identifying environment factors that contributes to car accident severity. That is my individual project, and I have developed code and presented results.
The research objective is to determine whether the weather conditions could predict how severe a car accident might be based on previous data and to get some insights that could potentially improve public safety and emergency planning. To be able to manage the scale of the data and ensure relevance, I narrowed down my focus to accidents in California, the state with the highest number of incidents based on the data shown. I have used a dataset of 7.7 million U.S. accident records that span across 2016 to 2023.
First, I filtered and cleaned the dataset, I have performed EDA (Exploratory Data Analysis), Correlation Studies using Correlation Matrix, and Data Visualization to assess how weather conditions like temperature, windspeed, visibility, and precipitation correlate to the severity of the car accidents. Based on that analysis, I found statistically significant relationships between weather variables and higher-severity vehicle crashes. I applied both Random Forest and KNN (K-Nearest Neighbor) Classification Models to predict the severity levels, after carefully addressing class imbalances through under- sampling, over-sampling, and a hybrid of both methods. Each model was validated using a five-fold cross-validation and evaluated with F1-scores to ensure the fairness in prediction across all severity levels. The best performing model achieved an F1-score of up to 0.99 and an overall accuracy score of 0.98 using the hybrid sampling approach.
My project culminated in a detailed report and a presentation that outlined actionable insights in which public agencies could issue weather-specific driving advisories, while urban planners might prioritize infrastructure improvements in high-risk areas. One challenge that I faced was ensuring model fairness given the class imbalance where I spent significant time engineering a solution that could balance accuracy and equity across all severity levels.
What I have learned from that project is that I would get domain experience or I would involve domain experts (i.e. Traffic Analysts, First Responders etc.) to make me understand more about the domain. That will make my work more impactful with real-world use cases. I believe domain expertise and experience would have a valuable input that could improve usability, enrich model interpretability, a better prediction and increase the value of recommendations to decision makers.
